#2: added initial project script, .gitignore and README.md files (#3)
exasol/row-level-security: doc/design.md

<head><link href="oft_spec.css" rel="stylesheet"></link></head>

# Introduction

## Acknowledgements

This document's section structure is derived from the "[arc42](https://arc42.org/)" architectural template by Dr. Gernot Starke, Dr. Peter Hruschka.

# Constraints

This section introduces technical system constraints.

## Bit-wise Functions Limited to 64 Bits
`const~bit-wise-functions-limited-to-64-bits~1`

In Exasol bit-wise functions (like `BIT_AND` or `BIT_OR`) are limited to 64 bit.

See also: [BIT_AND](https://docs.exasol.com/sql_references/functions/alphabeticallistfunctions/bit_and.htm#BIT_AND) (Exasol documentation)

Needs: dsn

# Solution Strategy

> Row-level security is not part of the Exasol core database. However with the [Virtual Schema](https://github.com/exasol/virtual-schemas) interface lends itself nicely to what we need to implement RLS as a plug-in.

Author: Why do we have a link to the jdbc adapter here?

Reviewer: You can link to the API description if you want to be more precise.

Author: Changed the link

## Requirement Overview

Please refer to the [System Requirement Specification](system_requirements.md) for user-level requirements.

# Building Blocks

## Row Level Security Adapter
`dsn~row-level-security-adapter~1`

The `RowLevelSecurityAdapter` is a Virtual Schema Adapter that modifies queries it receives so that they only return data the current user is allowed to see.

Comment:

Since this component implements the Virtual Schema Adapter Interface, it is also the entry point for the RLS plug-in.

Covers:

* `req~rows-users-are-allowed-to-read~1`

Needs: impl

## `QueryRewriter`
`dsn~query-rewriter~1`

The `QueryRewriter` is responsible for modifying the original query in order to inject row filters.

Covers:

* `req~rows-users-are-allowed-to-read~1`

Needs: impl

## `UserInformation`

The `UserInformation` keeps details about the users role assignments.

Covers:

* `req~user-roles~1`

# Runtime

## `RowLevelSecurityAdapter` Reads Custom Properties
`dsn~rls-adapter-reads-custom-properties~1`

The `RowLevelSecurityAdapter` reads the following custom properties:

> 1. `ROLE_ASSIGNMENT_TABLE`: name of the table that contains the mapping of users to the roles the have

Author: Don't we need also schema name?

Reviewer: Yes, please add this.

Author: added

Covers:

* `req~user-roles~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

## `UserInformation` Read User Roles
`dsn~user-information-reads-user-roles`

The `UserInformation` reads the current user's roles from a table with the following layout:

* `exa_user_name VARCHAR(128)` (see [https://docs.exasol.com/sql_references/basiclanguageelements.htm#SQL_Identifier]("SQL Identifier") in the Exasol documentation)
* `exa_role_mask DECIMAL(20,0)`

Covers:

* `req~user-roles~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

## `UserInformation` Caches User Roles
`dsn~user-information-caches-user-roles`

The `UserInformation` caches the roles a user has.

Rationale:

This speeds up subsequent row access checks because the users roles need to be determined only once.

Covers:

* `req~user-roles~1`

Needs: impl, utest

## Query Rewriter Determines User Roles

## Query Rewriter Identifies Protected Tables
`dsn~query-rewriter-identifies-protected-tables~1`

The Query Rewriter identifies a table as protected with row-level security, if that table has a column named `exa_row_roles`.

Covers:

* `req~rows-users-are-allowed-to-read~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

> ## Query Rewriter Replaces Tables

Author: That sounds a little bit misleading. As if we delete the origin table and replace it with something else

Reviewer: This is not true anymore anyway. I will fix this.

`dsn~query-rewriter-replaces-tables~1`

If a table is protected with row level security, the Query Rewriter replaces this table with sub-select that only yields columns the user is allowed to read.

Covers:

* `req~rows-users-are-allowed-to-read~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

## Query Rewriter Adds Row Filter
`dsn~query-rewriter-adds-row-filter~1`

The Query Rewriter adds a row filter to the injected sub-query that uses bitwise-`AND` against the users role mask and checks whether the result is not zero.

Covers:

* `req~rows-users-are-allowed-to-read~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

> # Cross-cutting Concerns

Author: Is it empty?

Reviewer: At the moment yes.

# Design Decisions

## How do we Implement Role Checking

> Users have roles. A user's roles decide which rows / columns this user is allowed to see.

Author: ```suggestion
Users have roles. A user's roles decide which rows his user is allowed to see.
```

Author: fixed

### Roles are Represented by the Bits of a 64 Bit Integer 
`dsn~roles-are-represented-by-the-bits-of-a-64-bit-integer~1`

Each role has an ID that corresponds to a bit in a 64 bit integer. ID &in; { 2^0, 2^1, ..., 2^63 }.

Comment:

This allows using bit-wise operators in role checks which are very efficient. It also means that in a row-level security scenario the overhead per column is constant (8 byte). The biggest downsides of this decision are that only 64 roles are available in total and that this decision is very hard to revise later.

Covers:

* `req~user-roles~1`

Needs: impl, utest

### Public Access Role ID 
`dsn~public-access-role-id~1`

The role with the ID 2^63 is reserved to represent public access.

Covers:

* `req~user-roles~1`

Needs: impl, utest

### All Users Have the Public Access Role
`dsn~all-users-have-the-public-access-role~1`

RCLS treats all users as if the public access role was assigned to them automatically. This means there is no need for data owners to assign this role to users.

Covers:

* `req~public-rows~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

### Null Values in Role IDs / Masks
`dsn~null-values-in-role-ids-and-masks~1`

> If the content of a role ID or role mask cell is the `NULL` value, it must be treated as if it were a zero.

Author: ```suggestion
If the content of a role ID or role mask cell is the `NULL` value, it must be treated as if it was a zero.
```

# Building Blocks

## Row Level Security Adapter
`dsn~row-level-security-adapter~1`

The `RowLevelSecurityAdapter` is a Virtual Schema Adapter that modifies queries it receives so that they only return data the current user is allowed to see.

Comment:

Since this component implements the Virtual Schema Adapter Interface, it is also the entry point for the RLS plug-in.

Covers:

* `req~rows-users-are-allowed-to-read~1`

Needs: impl

## `QueryRewriter`
`dsn~query-rewriter~1`

The `QueryRewriter` is responsible for modifying the original query in order to inject row filters.

Covers:

* `req~rows-users-are-allowed-to-read~1`

Needs: impl

## `UserInformation`

The `UserInformation` keeps details about the users role assignments.

Covers:

* `req~user-roles~1`

# Runtime

## `RowLevelSecurityDialect` Reads Custom Properties
`dsn~rls-dialect-reads-custom-properties~1`

The `RowLevelSecurityDialect` reads the following custom properties:

1. `ROLE_ASSIGNMENT_TABLE`: name of the table that contains the mapping of users to the roles the have
2. `SCHEMA_NAME`: name of the schema where tables are placed

Covers:

* `req~user-roles~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

> ## `UserInformation` Read User Roles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `UserInformation` Reads User Roles
```

Author: fixed
